Thorough review changes (#273)
w3c/wai-curricula: content/2-2.md

---
title: "[Draft] Module 2: Menus"
permalink: /curricula/developer-modules/menus/
ref: /curricula/developer-modules/menus/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-2.md
license: creative-commons
acknowledgements: /curricula/acknowledgements/
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors:</strong> Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS lists contributors and credits.</p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developer-modules/page-structure/
  next: /curricula/developer-modules/images/
---
 
## Introduction
{:.no-display}

> Courses based on this module should:

Reviewer: Possible additional learning outcome along the lines of "Code menus such that menu state is communicated"

Author: I think this is implicitly conveyed in:

> * code fly-out menus in a way that makes them usable by people using different assistive technologies and adaptive strategies

It really deserves more clarity, so I propose:

> * code fly-out menus in a way that their state is communicated to people using different assistive technologies and adaptive strategies

Reviewer: Sounds good

> Courses based on this module should:

Reviewer: Is there potentially a need to include something about coding menus to be responsive to viewport size?

Author: I think we could add that thought to what we have now.

Current:

> * code menu styles so that menus appear and behave as required, for example on hover and focus

Proposed:

> * code menu styles so that menus appear and behave as required, for example in different viewport sizes, and on hover and focus

Reviewer: That seems ok and I am happy if no one else flags it. I think it is quite a big issue though and it would be a shame to lose it within something else.

Author: Fair enough. One thing is that menus appear where expected and another thing is that they actually resize. Adding.

> * code menus so that they resize depending on different viewport sizes

* demonstrate how people with disabilities use structures, labels, and styling to interact with menus
* explain coding techniques to provide accessible structures, labels, and functionality of menus

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* explain strategies that people with disabilities use to interact with menus

> * mark up labels to identify menus provided on a page

Reviewer: For consistency, should this be "code" rather than "mark up"?

Author: Good point. It affects the whole resource actually, though here it can get specially confusing.

We were trying to make a distinction between:

* mark up -- provide semantics to presentation that might be visually apparent
* code -- may involve more of a set of programming skills

1. Do you thinkg that distinction is worthy?
    If so, I will take a general pass at the whole subset of "code" versus "mark up" and aupdate accordingly.

2. Do you think consistency is more important here as those differences may be very subtle and sometimes unnoticeable?
    If so, what verb do you think better conveys the message here? "Mark up", "code", other?

Reviewer: I think that the distinction might be too subtle to deal with effectively although I do appreciate the goal.

My gut would be to go with 'code' rather than 'mark up'. I tend to try to use 'mark up' to describe the result rather than the action. Although I am probably as guilty of inconsistency!

> * mark up labels to identify menus provided on a page

Author: ```suggestion
* code labels to identify menus provided on a page
```

* Introduce the different states that a menu item can have, such as hover, focus, current, active, or visited. Explain how to code these states so that they are perceived by all users. Examples of how to code these states are provided in the WAI tutorials, [Menu Items](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/styling/#menu-items).
* Show examples of different layouts for menus. Explain that menus should adapt to different text sizes users may choose. Mention that menus should have enough space so that they can be operated by all users. Considerations about readability and size of menu items are provided in the WAI tutorials, [General considerations](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/styling/#general-considerations).

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

> * Practical &mdash; Students are presented with different types of menus and are asked to code them so that they are placed where expected. Assess students' knowledge of the menu location within web pages.

Reviewer: I am the last person to ask about apostrophe placement but have developed many ways to avoid using them. Would "Assess student knowledge of the menu location within web pages." fit the bill and avoid people trying to workout if we have made an apostrophe catastrophe?

Author: This affects the whole resource as well. Tricky one for me also. In my Spanish brain this is "the knowledge of the students" (with no Saxon genitive at all as we don't have such structures).

I used "Students' knowledge" assuming "students" is plural and only needs apostrophe (no s after it). We hope this guidance supports the creation of courses that assess the knowledge of several students, not the knowledge of a specific student.

Not quite sure about what to do with this one. Maybe @slhenry can help with this. What about "students knowledge" (no apostrophe at all, but still plural)?

Reviewer: My money is on @slhenry knowing precisely what to do here :)

Reviewer 2: "Assess students' knowledge" is correct -- plural possessive.

I appreciate Kevin's approach of trying to limit apostrophes. I think in this case we want to keep it plural. So they'll just have to trust us that it's correct. :-)

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

> Explain the use of HTML elements and WAI-ARIA attributes to indicate the presence of submenu items, for example, `aria-haspopup`. Explain how to convey visible or hidden states of submenu items using WAI-ARIA to make them operable by all users.

Reviewer: [Minor] Is this about communicating the state to users rather than making it operable?

Author: I would say it is about both. You definitely need to make these operable. But for some users, not communicating their state means they cannot operate them efficiently as they may not be even aware about the submenus and about their state. Any suggestions about how to make this clearer?

Reviewer: I guess I fixated on the word 'operable' as one of the principles. If you used 'usable' it takes away from that issue and covers a lot of aspects. So:

> Explain how to convey visible or hidden states of submenu items using WAI-ARIA to make them usable by all users.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Show examples of menus that contain submenu items. Explain that the layer with the submenu items needs to be coded as a nested list, and that each of the submenu items needs to be coded as a list item. An example of the structure of menu and submenu items is provided in the WAI tutorials on [Indicate submenus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/flyout/#indicate-submenus).
* Explain the use of the WAI-ARIA attribute `aria-haspopup` to mark up the presence of submenu items. Indicate that this attribute should be present in the original HTML markup. An example of how to use the WAI-ARIA attribute `aria-haspopup` is provided in the WAI tutorials on [Indicate submenus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/flyout/#indicate-submenus).
* Show examples of different ways to interact with fly-out menus, such as using the mouse, keyboard, or voice interaction. Examples of how to make functionality of fly-out menus available to all users are provided in the WAI tutorials on [Fly-Out functionality](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/flyout/#fly-out-functionality). 

> * Explain that the WAI-ARIA attribute `aria-expanded` conveys if the submenu items are visible or hidden. Explain that the attribute needs to be present in the original HTML markup. Examples of how to use the `aria-expanded` attribute are provided in the WAI tutorials on [Indicate submenus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/flyout/#indicate-submenus).

Reviewer: [Typo?] Should this be "Explain *what* the WAI-ARIA attribute..." rather than "Explain *that* the WAI-ARIA attribute..."?

Author: I used "that" as a shorthand for "the fact that" (the fact that it conveys if submenu items are visible or hidden) in an attempt for tersification. "Explain what the WAI-ARIA attribute `aria-expanded` conveys if the submenu items are visible or hidden" sounds weird to me. We could have just "Explain the WAI-ARIA attribute `aria-expanded` conveys", but this would be even more weird as it would miss the fundamental part of it, what does this attribute convey?.

Anyway, happy to change if this is better understood.
